These unconscious distortions can lead
to maladaptive or even harmful behaviors
that seem reasonable to the person in
the moment. They push perceptions of the
self and of other people into extreme
categories. Those in relationships with
such individuals might reasonably
conclude that the person is actually a
diabolical liar and manipulator. When
the individual is wildly derogatory in
devaluing one moment and then shifts to
viewing themselves as the agrieved party
in the next moment, it has every
appearance of intentional and cynical
manipulation strategies like
gaslighting. I'm not attempting to
excuse manipulative or abusive behavior.
In most circumstances, individuals with
borderline organizations have sufficient
contact with reality to be accountable
for their actions. But borderline issues
do involve significantly skewed
perceptions of the self and others and
reliance on unconscious defense
mechanisms that blur boundaries and that
prevent the individual from having full
awareness of what they're doing and why
they're doing it. It's a level of object
relations where reality floats in and
out of clear focus. When emotionally
overwhelmed, the individual may regress
back to a level of object relations that
is basically psychotic. And when things
are going well, they may appear to
function at or near the neurotic level
where the self-concept is integrated and
stable. It's a confusing, somewhat
disturbing range of psychological
functioning.